---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Spam!
author:
  display_name: jamesoff
  login: jamesoff
  email: james@jamesoff.net
  url: http://jamesoff.net
author_login: jamesoff
author_email: james@jamesoff.net
author_url: http://jamesoff.net
wordpress_id: 132
wordpress_url: http://jamesoff.net/site/2003/10/28/spam-2/
date: '2003-10-28 15:14:21 -0500'
date_gmt: '2003-10-28 14:14:21 -0500'
categories:
- General
tags: []
comments: []
---
<p>Isn't that nice? Someone sent a load of spam out yesterday afternoon (my time) with <stuff>@jamesoff.net as the fake from address. My mailserver usually does about 100 mails a day maximum (most of which are spam), but yesterday it did over 7500. It would have done more, except my ADSL router appears to now throw a major wobbly whenever it's connected to the Internet. I can stay online for about 20 seconds max and then it all just grinds to a halt, apparently with the router crashing. This is annoying, because apart from that, qmail was doing very well with delivering mail at a great rate of knots.</p>
<p>This did give me the opportunity to phone Kerzon though, which was nice because I haven't spoken to him by phone in a while. Shame it took something like this for it to happen, but I wanted to make sure he knew what was going on with my secondary MX, and obviously I couldn't tell him online.</p>
<p>Hopefully if I weather the storm for a bit my Internet connection will start working properly again; I shall beat the router tonight with a stick.</p>
<p>I can't help wondering if this is retaliation for the fact I've started using <a href="http:&#47;&#47;www.spamcop.net" target="_blank">SpamCop<&#47;a> recently. Supposedly it's an anonymous submission service, and I would hardly say I've submitted enough spam to piss anyone off enough that they would do this. I also don't think I've been active enough on EFNet recently to have annoyed someone into DDoSing me with SMTP. I think I just got unlucky with someone randomly choosing my domain to use. This isn't going to discourage me from my personal (little) battle against spam - far from it. Instead, it's reinforced to me exactly how much I really fucking hate these bastards and how they're ruining the "Internet experience" for everyone. Increasingly now there are articles on sites like BBC News about how people are dissuaded from getting broadband because of the threat of spam, viruses, and trojans. I really would like those responsible to just fuck off, and having had this happen to me has only redoubled my hated of the whole situation.<&#47;stuff></p>
